# DIALECT (Driver Interactions and Latent Exclusivity or Co-occurrence in Tumors)

## Introduction
DIALECT (Driver Interactions and Latent Exclusivity or Co-occurrence in Tumors) is an algorithm designed to identify dependencies between pairs of driver mutations from somatic mutation counts. This tool addresses the challenge of distinguishing functional, driver mutations from neutral, passenger mutations in cancer genomics, enhancing the identification of mutual exclusivity or co-occurrence patterns from bulk DNA sequencing data.

## Installation
Instructions on how to install DIALECT.

```bash
# Example installation command
git clone https://github.com/raphael-group/dialect.git
cd dialect
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Data

### Source
The data used by DIALECT are Mutation Annotation Format (MAF) files derived from the PanCancer Atlas, accessible via [cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics](https://www.cbioportal.org/datasets). These files contain comprehensive mutation data needed for analysis, including missense, nonsense, frameshift, synonymous mutations, and more.

### Downloading and Preparing Data

Follow these steps to download and prepare the mutation data for use with DIALECT:

1. **Access Data**:
   - Navigate to the [cBioPortal's datasets search page](https://www.cbioportal.org/datasets).
   - Use the filter to select datasets marked as "TCGA, PanCancer Atlas".

2. **Download Data**:
   - Identify the dataset corresponding to the cancer subtype of interest.
   - Click on the download link to download the zipped data folder.

3. **Extract and Rename Files**:
   - Unzip the downloaded folder. It will typically be named something like `SUBTYPE_tcga_pan_can_atlas_2018`.
   - Within each unzipped folder, locate the file named `data_mutations.txt`.
   - Rename this file using its cancer subtype [abbreviation](https://gdc.cancer.gov/resources-tcga-users/tcga-code-tables/tcga-study-abbreviations) followed by a ".maf" suffix. For example, rename `data_mutations.txt` to `BRCA.maf` for Breast Cancer.

4. **Organize Data**:
   - Move all renamed `.maf` files to the `data/tcga_pancan_atlas` directory in your project folder. This directory is used by DIALECT to access mutation data for processing.

## Usage

DIALECT requires two main types of data inputs: the background mutation rate distributions and the mutation matrix. Below are the steps to generate these inputs and how to run the analysis.

### Generating Background Mutation Rate Distributions

DIALECT uses the [CBaSE method](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng.3987) to generate these distributions:

1. **Navigate to the cbase Directory**:
   - Go to the `cbase` directory located within the `bmrs` folder in the DIALECT project repository.

2. **Run CBaSE**:
   - Use the modified CBaSE code provided to generate the background mutation rate distributions. We've simplified the process, allowing you to run the following command:

    ```bash
    bash cbase.sh -c SUBTYPE
    ```
    **Important:**
    * Replace `SUBTYPE` with the appropriate cancer subtype abbreviation (e.g., `BRCA`, `LUAD`). 
    * Ensure the corresponding MAF file (`SUBTYPE.maf`) is present in the `data` directory.

    The `auxiliary` folder within the `cbase` subfolder contains additional data files and scripts provided by the [CBaSE method](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng.3987). Latest versions of the publicly available CBaSE scripts and files are available [here](http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/cbase/downloads.html). 

    **Note**: At the time of writing, the latest CBaSE scripts do not incorporate sample-specific background mutation rate distributions. Direct modifications to the method were made by Donate Weghorn's group for obtaining the values used by Raphael's group. The `auxiliary` folder has been included in this project to provide necessary scripts and data files that are part of these modifications.

### Preparing the Mutation Matrix and Background Mutation Rate Files

Since CBaSE keeps only a subset of mutations, it is advisable to use the mutation matrix generated by CBaSE for consistency in analysis:

- the mutation matrices will be separated into missense and nonsense files. following the CBaSE run above, these will be available in the cbase/out/SUBTYPE directory for the specified subtype.
- the files needed are SUBTYPE_mis/non_cnt_mtx.csv and SUBTYPE_mis/non_bmr.csv

### Running DIALECT

Detailed instructions on how to run DIALECT with the prepared

## License
Distributed under the BSD-3 License. See `LICENSE` for more information.

## Contact
Ahmed Shuaibi - [ashuaibi@princeton.edu](mailto:ashuaibi@princeton.edu)

## Citation
If you use DIALECT in your research, please cite our paper:

- [Driver Interactions and Latent Exclusivity or Co-occurrence in Tumors](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.24.590995)